---
title: 'Chapter 11 Synopsis'
date: '2020-01-01'
---

- In the first half of the chapter, the point of view centers on Kusanagi, who represents the reader to a certain extent, as he looks for Yukawa at Shinozaki Station after being told of Yukawa's whereabouts by one of Yukawa's graduate student. Yukawa has been observing the bicycles as well as the people near the Shinozaki Station, the train station closest to the site of the murder. He and Kusanagi ponder the murderer's motives in not only stealing a bike, but also in stealing the particular bike that was found at the crime scene - a brand new bike whose lock had been cut off with bolt cutters. It seems that any old bike, particularly one without a lock, would've suited the killer's purpose. This mystery surrounding this strange choice of bikes is further reinforced by the fact that the killer had left fingerprints on the bike despite going to all the trouble to burn the fingerprints off the dead body. Yukawa hints that these actions taken by the murderer are not accidental nor the result of shoddy execution but rather indicative of a much more clever "caper" - in other words a deceit that belies a more insidious reality.

- Kusanagi wonders about Ishigami's role in the murder, having found out from Ishigami about Yukawa's personal intrusion in the case, particularly how Yukawa used Kusanagi as a pretext for talking about the murder case with Ishigami. As a result, Kusanagi feels that he has a right to know what Yukawa knows about Ishigami's involvement. When asked about Ishigami's role in the murder, though, Yukawa becomes silent and refuses to further cooperate in the case, agreeing to pursue his own investigation separate from that of Kusanagi while Kusagani pursues his, each witholding from the other what they know.

- The second half of the chapter shifts to Ishigami's point of view. Having rented a car, he waits for Kudo to come out of the office building where Kudo's runs a printing business, at which point Ishigami snaps a picture of him. As Kudo drives off, Ishigami follows him in his rental car. Eventually, Kudo pulls into the underground parking lot of a hotel. Ishigami follows him inside the parking lot and takes another picture but is spotted by Kudo. While leaving from the parking lot, Ishigami notices Yasuko enter the hotel.

- Before leaving, though, we are shown a letter that Ishigami has written for Yasuko. It is a threatening note demanding that she stop seeing Kudo. The note is to be accompanied by the photos taken while secretly shadowing Kudo. Seeing Kudo enter the hotel where Kudo has apparently gone to meet her only serves to increase the jealousy that is growing stronger in Ishigami - or so it seems.