---
title: 'Chapter 12 Synopsis'
date: '2020-01-01'
---

- While meeting with Yasuko in the hotel, Kudo tells her about the visit from Detective Kusanagi, which was the result of Yasuko telling Detective Kishitani all she knew about Kudo. Aware of having been followed by some strange figure (which we know to be Ishigami), Kudo shares with Yasuko his discovery about being followed, believing this to have been the police's doing. Yasuko is surprised to learn of this as well, casting nervous glances at the people in the room around her. With Kudo having come under suspicion, Yasuko suggests meeting less frequently but Kudo rejects this, preferring to continue living as normally as possible.

- Yasuko feels relieved that Kudo is under suspicion because it provides a diversion from what really happened. At the same time, she is guilty about having such selfish thoughts. She is still ambivalent about her relationship with him: on the one hand wanting intimacy with Kudo, on the other hand fearing a potential backlash from Ishigami.

- Getting a call from Sayoko, Yasuko discovers that Ishigami is now a suspect. While being questioned by the police, Sayoko mentions Ishigami's crush on Yasuko. Having been told by Kudo about people who visit the lunch box shop purposely to see Yasuko, the police ask Sayoko to offer further information that might elaborate on this, at which point Sayoko mentions Ishigami. Kudo's involvement in Yasuko's life, which is the result of Yasuko not following Ishigami's instructions, has led to Ishigami becoming a suspect.

- Ishigami calls Yasuko, per his usual routine, and learns about his newfound status as a suspect. This has occurred as a result of the police visit to the lunch box shop where Sayoko, under police questioning, divulges her suspicion about Ishigami having a crush on Yasuko. However, Yasuko fails to mention Kudo's role in arousing Detective Kusanagi's suspicion about people who visit the lunch box shop to see Yasuko, which is what led the police to go question Sayoko in the first place. She purposely withholds information about her relationship with Kudo from Ishigami, which is irritating from his point of view. Nonetheless, Ishigami at no point attempts to pry into Yasuko's private life by asking about Kudo despite the intensity of his curiousity. Ishigami is also enraged to learn about how Sayoko and her husband had discovered his crush on Yasuko. Before hanging up, Ishigami instructs Misato to talk to the police about her discussion with another student in the afternoon of March 10 during which Misato had discussed her plan to see a movie with her mother that day.

- Kusanagi visits Yukawa, who is busy burning something mysterious in an oil drum. They discuss more theories and conjectures about the case, with Yukawa criticizing the shortcomings in Kusanagi's reasoning and holding back his own thoughts and speculations about what happened. At the end, Kusanagi receives a phone call from police headquarters informing him of Misato's new testimony about her discussion with another student in the afternoon of March 10. This seems to support the idea that Yasuko ahd her accomplice had planned the murder of Togashi. Yukawa is not convinced.