---
title: 'Chapter 4 Synopsis'
date: '2020-01-01'
---

- Kusanagi and Kishitani visit Yasuko's apartment to question her. Having identified the dead body as that of Togashi, the police looked into Togashi's background and discovered that he had worked as foreign car salesman. Through his connections at work, they further discovered that he had been married at the time and that he also continued to visit his ex-wife after their divorce.

- Yasuko opens the door for the two detectives and looks at them suspiciously. She pretends to be surprised that the police have come to visit her. When told that Togashi has died, she feigns further shock and surpirse. She claims that she had not been in touch with him since the time of their divorce five years ago. When asked about her whereabouts on March 10, she recounts where she had gone: after Misato came home, they went to a movie, then a ramen shop, and then to a karaoke place. In the mean time, Misato remains hidden the back room with her sliding door closed.

- On their way out, Kishitani and Kusanagi run into Ishigami, who is returning from work. They turn around and knock on his door to question him. Ishigami feigns ignorance about Yasuko's affairs, claiming to have had very little contact with her in the past. He also claims to have never seen Togashi. When questioned about March 10, Ishigami claims that he came home as usual and that nothing unusual happened next door.

- Once the detective leave, Ishigami goes to a public pay phone to call Yasuko. Yasuko recounts how the police questioned her while Ishigami listens, analyzing everything that took place. He recommends that she hold onto the ticket stubs from her movie ticket so that she can prove that she was at the movies. Ishigami further tells her to place the tickets in drawer, not in a theater pamphlet, so as not to make it look too obvious that the ticket stubs are being used to establish an alibi. Ishigami reassures her and tells her to follow the plan that he has laid out for her.

- Back at the police station, Chief Mamiya orders Kusanagi to double check on the credibility of Yasuko's movie theater alibi. He further indicates that Kusanagi is to go to Club Marian in Kinshicho, where Yasuko formely worked as a nightclub hostess, to continue asking questions.
