---
title: 'Chapter 7 Synopsis'
date: '2020-01-01'
---

- Ishigami enters the lunch box shop, having bid his farewell to Yukawa. Yusako inquires about his vistor, which makes him nervous, as he wants to avoid talking to her in a manner that will arouse suspicision. He explains that the visitor from last night, Yukawa, is an old friend, which surprises Yusako.

- While having a break, Yasuko eats with Sayoko and Mr. Yonazawa. Sayoko relates how the police had been questioning both her and Yonazawa about the possible appearance of Togashi at the lunch box shop, which the owners strenuously deny. They express their frustration with the police questioning and extend their sympathy to Yusako as she continues to come under the focus of the police investigation. Sayoko also speculates about how Togashi might have been killed and also remarks how Togashi's death is a great relief for Yasuko. It's apparent that neither Sayoko nor Yonazawa hold any suspicion towards Yasuko.

- When Yasuko get back to her job duties, an unexpected visitor appears. It is a man by the name of Kudo, a married man and former acquaintance of Yasuko's who had been a regular at Club Marian where Yasuko worked. Despite his interest in Yasuko, the relationship between them had always been platonic, with Yasuko being uncomfortable with the idea of having an affair with a married man. When Sayoko and Yonaza see Kudo, they greet him with joy and spend some time sharing stories about their time while working at the club.

- At Sayoko's urging, Kudo and Yusako go to a coffee shop to catch up. Kudo had heard about Togashi's murder on the news and, as a result, became concerned about Yasuko's well-being, which prompted him to visit her at the shop. It turns out that Kudo had once had an unpleasant encounter with Togashi in the past: while escorting Yasuko back home, he went to her door to return a cigarette case that Yasuko had left behind. When Togashi opened the door, he became infuriated and attacked Kudo, believing Kudo to be another customer from the club. The next day, Togashi went to Kudo's office to offer a forced apology in order to avoid legal consequences.

- It starts to rain, and Kudo offers to pay for a taxi to take Yasuko back home. As they get out of the taxi, they are seen by Ishigami, who is standing at the front of the building. Yasuko watches as Kudo departs and returns home where she gets her usual call from Ishigami, who represses the urge to ask about Kudo. Although delighted to see Kudo, Yasuko now worries that Ishigami might harbor feelings of jealousy after seeing her with Kudo together.